NATIONAL SECURITY CONCEPT
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA
Introduction
1. The National Security Concept of the Republic of Bulgaria represents
formally adopted political views on protecting the Bulgarian citizens, society
and state against external and internal threats of any nature, taking into account
the available resources, and conforming to the level of guarantees which provide
the global, Euro-Atlantic and European security system and steady development.
2. The Concept defines the goals and objectives in the period of the
Republic of Bulgaria. s accession into the efficient collective system of EuroAtlantic and European security, and in view of the risk factors that currently
threaten the security of this country. The basis of the Euro-Atlantic and
European security system are the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO),
the European Union (EU), the West European Union (WEU) and the
Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).

The New Realities
3. World-wide, the threat of a global nuclear conflict caused by the
ideological opposition has decreased. There is a tendency towards promoting the
role of law in settling disputable inter-state problems. The UN Security Council.
s mechanisms for crises management are being improved. The danger of a direct
military aggression against Bulgaria has considerably decreased. Nevertheless,
the importance of military and force factors in the international relations is
maintained.
4. A growing importance in Bulgaria. s security is being played by the
world economic, political, scientific and technological, environmental, and
information processes as well as by the fierce competition for access to
resources and infrastructures, to markets and modern technologies. A global
information society has emerged, a world economic integration is underway,
which poses new challenges for Bulgaria.
5. Bulgaria's accession into the international financial and commercial
structures is opening new prospects for ensuring our security. The isolation of
this country from the world integration processes in itself is threat to the
Bulgarian citizens, society and state.
6. In Europe, the respect has been increased for European political and
economic organisations as well as for the Euro-Atlantic military-political ones.
This makes it very unlikely that unilateral decisions, including military ones, are
imposed in regional or bilateral conflicts.
7. After the Warsaw Treaty Organisation was dissolved and the block
opposition was overcome, there had been a tendency to promote confidence and
co-operation. The European security architecture has been gaining greater
importance.
8. The economic and social differences on the continent have deepened
along with the emergence of a new insecurity and new risks. Conflicts of ethnic,
religious and social nature have come into being. The contradictory transition in
the states of Central and Eastern Europe represents a major challenge to their
democratic institutions and to European structures.
9. On the continent, there is still no fully effective collective system for
security and stability. Conflicts in former Yugoslavia have shown the
insufficient effectiveness to implement peace agreements only through the
means and mediation of the existing European structures.
10. European states are to a different degree integrated into world and
continental military-political and commercial unions. On the continent, there is a
. grey. zone consisting of countries that are partially or totally excluded from the
integration processes. This zone is characterised by social insecurity, decline in
living standards and emergence of international criminal networks. A real threat
to the fragile democracies in Central and Eastern Europe as well as to the
economic development of the entire continent are not any adversary armies but
illegal criminal groupings specialised in organised violence, goods-smuggling,
and trafficking of people, drugs and arms.
11. In South -Eastern Europe, various religious and ethnic entities co-exist,
some of which conflicting between each other. After the emergence of new
states there has been a strive of some entities towards independence and closing
themselves. This sharply increases the regional threats to our national security.
The delayed pace of the democratic changes in the region leads to a
deterioration of historically accumulated problems, and to an incapacity to settle
them in line with the European democratic standards.
12. The states in this region differ considerably in the degree of ensuring
their own security and membership in international alliances. The differences
are political, institutional, cultural, in living standards and in public practices.
The status of states in the region is different in military terms. Regional and
ethnic extremism put an imprint on local societies which lack strong democratic
traditions.
13. The Balkans are an area of conflict and tension in Europe. This poses
serious risks to Bulgaria. s national security. This country suffered immense
losses due to its isolation as a consequence of the imposed trade, economic and
financial bans on former Yugoslavia. These bans created conditions for the
development of organised crime and corruption, and for a long-lasting decline of
the Bulgarian sate institutions. Thus, second after the regional wars, crime has
become a major threat. The high degree of lawlessness is constantly threatening
the security of individual citizens, undermining the economic prosperity and
legitimacy of state institutions in the region.
14. Despite the fast technological changes, the Balkans have retained their
important geo-political position. The significance of the region as a transport,
infrastructure and energy cross-road is increasing with the future enlargement of
the European Union and NATO as well as with the linking of Caucasus and
Central Asian states to European markets.
15. Bulgaria now is overcoming the insecurity from the difficult economic
situation of the country and the catastrophic decline in the living standards of the
Bulgarian citizens. As a result of the grave economic crises, the interests of the
people have been significantly deprived as well as their rights to good way of
life, employment, social and health insurance.
16. Yet another insecurity concern, such as the citizens. fear for their lives,
the fear of unpunished crimes against the individual, and the encroachment
against private property, has been gradually neutralised Via legislative and
administrative measures companies are alleviated from the tensions and
hardships caused by blackmail and violence, by disloyal competition and
corruption of the administration. A tradition is being gradually established in the
society to stand for the rights and freedoms of the individual. The state is being
placed in service of the people, and not the other way around - submitting the
people to the state. The structures of the civil society are gaining strength.
Experience is being acquired in democratic procedures for their functioning and
development.
17. The internal stability of the country will be consolidating along with
the greater ability of the executive and judicial powers to protect the citizens, the
civil society and the state against lawlessness. This will determine the success of
the transition to democracy and market economy. Internal order and security
will prevent a crisis in the rule of law in Bulgaria.
18. For Bulgaria, the transition to democracy and market economy, to
Euro-Atlantic and European integration, and thus towards the establishment of a
new security and stability, was blocked in the past by an unwillingness and
inability for radical reform which lead to serious political conflicts. Economic
crises were deteriorated and reinforced by inter-institutional wars. As a result,
the renovation and reforms of the country were halted for quite a while. This
caused a grave demographic crisis reinforced by an unprecedented high degree
of immigration. The average length of life decreased, and birth-rate dropped
sharply, which creates dangers for the future survival and protection of the
nation.
19. Bulgaria is not in a position to ensure its security on its own or to seek
security through neutrality, because of the insufficient financial, economic and
military potentials. The new realities precondition the need of the country to join
effective collective systems for security and economic development. At the
same time, new opportunities are emerging, and the importance of Bulgaria. s
own policies is enhanced in neutralising the adverse factors for the security of
the country. Bulgaria has the potential to be a significant security and stability
factor in South -Eastern Europe.

General provisions
20. We can speak of national security when the major rights and liberties
of the Bulgarian citizens are protected as well as the state borders, the territorial
integrity and independence of the country, when there is not any danger of
armed attack, violated change in the constitutional order, political dictate or
economic compulsion for the state and the democratic functioning of the state
and civilian institutions is guaranteed in result of which the society and the
nation preserve and increase their prosperity and develop.
21. The Bulgarian citizens, society and state have obligations included in
the Constitution and the laws of the country namely to be creators and
guarantors of their security. At the same time they are mutually connected users
of security and the violation of the security of any one of them violates the
security of the rest. Together they constitute the unified security structure of
Bulgaria.
22. The security is guaranteed when the country successfully realises the
national interests, purposes and priorities and when necessary is in a position to
defend them effectively from external and internal threats.
23. The level of security is defined by the degrees of protection and
effective realisation of the interests of Bulgarian citizens, society and state
which jointly comprise the national interests. The interests of the Bulgarian
citizens are expressed in the real guarantee of the constitutional rights and
liberties, the personal safety, increase in the quality and level of living, of the
social and the health insurance. The interests of the civilian society are in the
confirmation of democracy, the civilian control upon the institutions, and the
freedom of associating, in the rights of the religious, ethnic and minority groups
in the preservation of the national spiritual and cultural values and traditions.
The interests of the state require protection of the Constitution, the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country, achievement of political and financial
stability of the economic and social development, strict keeping of legal order,
equality and mutually useful international co-operation.
24. Three are three major factors of the national security of Bulgaria:
1. the degree of development and the resources of the country
2. effectiveness of its foreign and internal policy, and
3. the participation of Bulgaria in the collective systems for security and
economic development.

25. The national security is a priority for the Republic of Bulgaria. It
defines the major purposes and programmes for its development. Forms the
strategic purposes of the internal and foreign policy of the state.
26. The major pre-requisite for the realisation of the national interests is the
preservation of the possibilities for Bulgaria to solve independently its internal,
political, economic and social problems, and arrange its relations with other
states and communities despite the intentions, positions and interests of third
countries.

Principles of National Security
27. The National Security is built by strictly keeping to the Constitution,
the laws of the Republic of Bulgaria and the ratified by the National Assembly
international agreements and conventions. Bulgaria draws into accordance with
the EU and NATO standards its legislation in the field of security.
28. The Republic of Bulgaria does not have any territorial claims and does
not recognise such. This principle destroys the old and does not create any new
regional tensions. It confirms Bulgaria as a source of security. The Republic of
Bulgaria does not build its security at the expense of other states or societies.
The will expressed by it for NATO membership is with the purpose of guarantee
of the security and is not aimed against third countries. The pre-requisite for the
increase of security guarantees for the country is the increase in the security of
all the countries in Europe and the world.
29. The priority policy for the Republic of Bulgaria are the loyalty and the
mutual benefit in the relations with other countries and international unions.
Today no one expresses openly hostility against Bulgaria.
30. The security of Bulgaria is guaranteed by the world's and Euro -
Atlantic structures for collective security.
31. The National Security is based upon the defensive Military Doctrine
which specifies the elaboration and the use of the armed forces. Bulgaria seeks
security on the Balkans and is against any military and political unions on the
Balkans.
32. The Bulgarian intelligence and counter-intelligence bodies are acting
on the base of special laws. They are acquiring information with own means and
through the international organisations for the military-political state of the
countries in the region and the accumulation of such military potential which
can threaten the national security. The specialised bodies are keeping the laws of
the country and the international law by preserving the rights and liberties of the
Bulgarian citizens.
33. By propaganda of the national historical and spiritual values, of the
moral and cultural heritage of all Bulgarians is confirmed the national identity
and ideal. Preserved is the territorial and national integrity of Bulgaria while
considering the rights and liberties of the different ethnic and religious
communities. Built is the image of Bulgaria as the Fatherland of all Bulgarians
within and outside the boundaries of the country. Defended are their spiritual
values and civilian rights.

Priorities and Factors of National Security
34. The process of integration into NATO and EU has its positive influence
upon the security of Bulgaria. But only the full membership in them will lead to
its complete guarantee. The national priority for Bulgaria is the membership in
NATO and EU which corresponds to the long-term interests of the country.
35. The successful integration of Bulgaria into the Euro-Atlantic and
European structures for security and development depends on the progress in the
peace process in South-eastern Europe and is slowed down by the military
conflicts and destabilisation of the neighbour countries. This presupposes that
the country leads very active foreign policy for the creation of peace in the
Balkans. This policy is the most important element in the strategy for the
preventive defence of Bulgarian interests. Its own security is defined by the
degree to which Bulgaria generates security for the neighbour countries. This is
the reason why with its regional initiatives for the increase of the mutual
confidence in the political-military field the country helps for the increase in the
security and stability in the Balkans.
36. The policy of security distributes the national resources in such manner
as to protect Bulgaria from the imposing of foreign political and economic will
and to ensure its right for a sovereign choice in all aspects of domestic and
foreign policy, the policy for security and defence.
37. It is necessary that the Bulgarian positions in the supra-national bodies
and structures according to the Paris Charter for new Europe which are in a
process of establishment are strengthened. In this way Bulgaria is confirmed as
an active and full-fledged partner in the global political and economic processes.
38. The economic factor is decisive for the guarantee of national security.
Only the stabilisation, re-establishment and growth of Bulgarian economy are in
a position to satisfy the interests of the Bulgarian citizens, society and state, to
solve the problems concerning the deficiency of resources, to improve the living
standard and increase the degree of social protection. The observation and
development of Bulgarian scientific and technical potential for the mastering of
the new and creation of own high technologies is a perspective factor for the
protection of national security.
39. The positive influence of the economic factor for the national security
is enhanced by the strategic participation of the Bulgarian economy into the
world, European and regional co-operation, when it is integrated into the unified
European economic sphere.
40. The significance of the Bulgarian economy for national security and
stable development depends on the capability for development of the own
infrastructure as an important connecting link between the European countries
and the new markets in the Black Sea- Caucasian region, the Middle East and
Central Asia. Through the Bulgarian territory pass the strategic inter-continental
transport, communications and energy corridors from which depends the
national and European security. From the establishment of these channels, and
the transformation of the country into a Balkan communications and energy
centre will depend the importance of Bulgaria for the world and European
security.
41. The establishment of Bulgaria as an important component of the
European and regional security depends on the re-establishment of the lost
positions of Bulgarian producers and merchants on traditional markets and
especially on the strategic market of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
on the development of joint activities and co-operation with the leading
European manufacturers, as well as the ensuring of the energy independence of
the country.
42. The information factor for the guarantee of the national security is
functioning by keeping the constitutional rights and liberties of the citizens in
the field of preserving and exchange of reliable information through the
development of modern Bulgarian communications and media.
43. The preservation of national security requires that the use of
information should not be permitted for purposes of manipulation of public
consciousness. It is also a priority to be guaranteed by special law the protection
of the state information resource from leakage of political, economic, scientific
and technical and any other information important for the country. 44. The
Armed Forces and the security bodies are the main guarantees for the national
security of the country. Their effectiveness depends on the resources provided to
them, the force and stability of the laws, upon which they are basing their
activity, the motivation of the human factor and the availability and precise
character of the information concerning the threats and dangers.
45. The Military Doctrine of Bulgaria is developed on the basis of this
Concept and the Law on Defense and Armed Forces of the Republic of Bulgaria.
On its basis the Program for the Reform of the Bulgarian Armed Forces and
their modernization are done. The guarantees for the security of the country are
strengthened through realization of initiatives for increase of the military
political confidence in the region and through the success of the PfP Program for
integration in the Euro-Atlantic structures.
46. The security organs prevent and neutralize the threats and risks in close
co-operation with the investigation and prosecution and together with the
international organizations for combating the criminality.
47. The juridical organs establish respect for the laws in the country by
imposing effective and just sanctions to those violating them. The long term
guarantee of the national interests requires development of the legislation and its
harmonization with the norms of the European Union.
48. The effective functioning of the juridical organs presupposes reform
and modernization of the juridical organs on the basis of a unified strategy for
combating the criminality and corruption. The national interests require
achieving a national consensus on the measures, politics and resources that
should be allocated for this combat. The state strategy for combating criminality
and corruption is a further development of this Concept in the field of internal
security.
49. The environmental factor - protection, restoration and reproduction of
the Bulgarian nature should provide a favorable living atmosphere for the
Bulgarian citizens and society. The national interests are realized when there is
an optimum balance between the protection of nature and waters and the needs
to use the natural resources for a steady development of Bulgaria.

Organization And Functions of the National Security System
50. In compliance with the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria the
President, the National Assembly and the Council of Ministers have
responsibilities as far as the national security is concerned.
51. The President chairs the National Security Advisory Council, the status
of which is defined by Law.
52. The National Assembly carries out the legislative building of the
national security system. Through its Permanent National Security Committee it
controls the executive power and the special security organs as far as the
compliance with the law and effectiveness of the actions are concerned as well
as the efficient use of the resources, makes an assessment of the political risks.
Through its permanent Committee on Foreign Integration Policy it controls the
executive power in the field of the foreign aspects of the national security.
53. The Council of Ministers on the basis of this concept and in the pursue
of the responsibilities in the area of security imposed by the Constitution of the
Republic of Bulgaria through a report to the National Assembly annually points
out the risks for the country and makes an assessment of the level of protection
of national interests. The Council of Ministers allocates the resources of the
country for increase of the level of protection of the national interests. The
ministries and institutions within the framework of their competence develop
and realize strategies and programs for the most efficient use of the political,
military and economic resources of the country.
54. The Council of Ministers when implementing its functions is assisted
by a Security Council comprising of : Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Minister of Defense, Minister of Interior, their deputies, the Chief of GS
of BA, and the Chiefs of the intelligence and counter-intelligence organs. The
President personally or through his representatives can always participate in the
work of the Council and at any time can require information from it.
55. The Security Council: o summarizes, analyzes and makes conclusions
from the whole current information about the risks the national security faces
and makes a professional assessment and prognosis for the dynamics of the
threats; o plans concrete measures for the neutralization of the threats and
proposes solutions in a crisis; o coordinates the plans of the special organs for
acquiring of information and provides position on resources division; o develops
and proposes to the Council of Ministers an annual report on the national
security.The President, the Chairman of the National Assembly and the Prime
Minister having in mind the main goals and tasks referring to the security of the
country request information in the Security Council. The Security Council
provides an information equal in volume and contents to the President, the
Chairman of the National Assembly, and the Prime-Minister.
56. The civilian control upon the state policy for security and the bodies
performing it is guaranteed by the Constitution and the laws of the country.


"C:\Users\35989\Desktop\NSResearch\Материали за анализ\БГ Стратегии и Концепция за НС\NATIONAL SECURITY CONCEPT_ENG.txt"
"C:\Users\35989\Desktop\NSResearch\Материали за анализ\БГ Стратегии и Концепция за НС\3-20180330_Aktualizirana_SNSRB_2018.txt"