National Security Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria Approved by National Assembly Decision of 25.02.2011, promulgated, Durzhaven Vestnik, No 19/8.03.2011 I. Introduction 1. The national security policy of the Republic of Bulgaria rests on the values of democracy, the national culture, human and civil rights, equal opportunities for self-fulfillment, the Constitution of Bulgaria and the underlying acts that guarantee international security. 2. The National Security Strategy embodies the peacefulness and the traditions of good neighborly relations and mutually advantageous cooperation that characterize Bulgaria's policy. The Strategy is an integral part of the European Union's and NATO's efforts geared to expand the zone of stability, cooperation and prosperity by the elimination of threats that emanate from terrorism and extremism and by the settlement of regional conflicts and active involvement in the solution of global problems. The country's contribution to the stability of state-to state relations and to the application of the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of the Balkan Peninsula and the Black Sea Region countries is of particular importance. 3. While the Strategy frames a broader concept of national security by making paramount the security of the citizen and the social and economic aspects, it does not underrate the dimension of defense, foreign policy, intelligence, public order and law-enforcement. More than ever before it is evident that the end product and the genuine meaning of the "national security" concept is the protection of the individual citizen and of his inalienable freedom and dignity. 4. The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria gives a catalog of the national interests and of the conditions and prerequisites required for their materialization by the elimination of the risks and threats to the country and to its citizens. The national and sectoral priorities and security policies are geared to protect the national interests with due regard for the fast-changing security context and given an optimal allocation of resources to achieve efficient security system management. 5. The National Security Concept that was approved in 1998 was the pioneer in the formulation of the definition of national security that was codified in the Classified Information Act and in the Act on the State Agency for National Security. 6. While the National Security Concept institutionalized top-level Executive power advisory and coordinating activities, it enabled members of other responsible factors to join in the security policy formulation, implementation and control. First steps were taken to develop a national security system and an intelligence community in the Republic of Bulgaria. The Government started to report regularly to the National Assembly on the national security status, the national security protection policies and the upholding of the national interests. The process did not evolve in subsequent periods. 7. The Concept was particularly important in making public, to the society at large and to the potential NATO allies, the national security policy values, objectives, principles and mechanisms. The document inspired the Military Doctrine of the Republic of Bulgaria and other strategy papers and legislative acts. 8. The national security strategies that were drafted in 2005 and 2008 never reached the approval procedure stage. However, the drafting process enabled judgments of the dynamism of national objectives and interests, of the changes in the security context and of the requirements deriving thereof to security policy. 9. Following Bulgaria's accession to NATO and to the European Union (EU), the country's security strategy was no longer confined to the national dimension and was incorporated into our allies' efforts.The risks and threats to the security of the Republic of Bulgaria and of its citizens are largely identical with or similar to what the EU and NATO member countries face. 10. The existing and newly emerging threats'dynamism which is in the form of parallel occurring processes that improve the international political and military security context and minimize the probability of conventional armed aggression against the Republic of Bulgaria and to which new criminal and transborder risks and threats to citizens and the society are to be added, calls for a new approach to the development of a security strategy with adequate update of parameters. 11. Adjustment to the changing security context calls for reprioritization of security policies, the involvement of the society's whole institutional potential and the application of new forms of interaction between the State, the businesses and the non-governmental sectors, as for instance private-public partnerships. The expansion of the security policy social range faces the horizontal and vertical institutional coordination of the "chain of command" management with new challenges. Institutions and their structural units must act as integrated components of the national security system. 12. The policies designed to avert risks and threats to national security and to guarantee that citizens and democratic institutions are protected are part and parcel of the EU's and NATO's combined efforts geared to translate into reality the vision of a single area of freedom, security and justice. While the country implements its strategic priorities to build a more stable and democratic state where citizens feel safe to exercise their fundamental rights and to fulfill their obligations, it surmounts the existing barriers to its further integration in the EU and NATO and seeks to join more effectively their governing bodies. 13. The security policy prepares the institutions, society and citizens to respond in a highly volatile security context and to generate conditions in which the interests of the Republic of Bulgaria can be achieved. Bulgaria's common and sectoral security policy rests on the security context assessment and on the attainment and advancement of the national interests. 14. Bulgaria's National Security Strategy is an underlying document for the agreed formulation, planning, implementation, coordination and control of the national security policy as pursued by the institutions of the State in collaboration with the citizens and the civil society organizations. 15. The implemented National Security Strategy will guarantee the rights, freedoms, security and wellbeing of the individual and of the society, will guard the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country and the unity of the nation, will protect the Constitution-established system and democratic values and will shield the population and the critical infrastructure whenever crises, disasters, industrial accidents or catastrophes and other risks and threats occur. 16. The National security system is put in place to achieve modern manageability of the efforts of the central government institutions, local authorities, corporate entities, citizens and civil society National Security Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria 30 organizations geared to guarantee the principles of democracy and sustainable development of the national economy and the country's wellbeing. 17. The Strategy's time horizon is 2020. II. The fundamentals II.1. National security policy principles 18. The National Security Strategy rests on the following principles: rule of law and equality of all citizens before the law; interdependence of security and the citizens'fundamental rights and freedoms; dialog and enhanced partnership between the citizens, the society and the State; mutual confidence between the State institutions and cooperation with the private sector, NGOs and citizens, with the NATO and EU allies and with partner countries; national consensus on the national security policy; the inseparability of the national security from the NATO and EU security; proactive coordination in the activities of State institutions and organizations in line with their competences; integrated interinstitutional approach to the development of the national security system; openness, transparency and accountability in security policy formulation and making; efficiency and effectiveness of the decision-taking and decision implementation process; democratic control on the national security system. 11.2. National interests 19. The interests of vital importance are: to guarantee the rights, freedoms, security and wellbeing of the individual, of the society and of the State; to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country and the unity of the nation; to protect the Constitution-established system and to uphold democratic values; to defend the population and the critical infrastructure in the event of crises, disasters, accidents, catastrophes and other risks and threats; to save and promote the national identity on the basis of civil unity; to ensure the integrity of Bulgarian civil society; to address the negative demographic developments and sizeable regional development gaps and to promote a socio-economic environment which is friendly to the fulfillment of generations of Bulgarian citizens who are capable of securing the place that the Republic of Bulgaria deserves to hold in the EU and in global political, economic, financial and social developments. 20. Other important interests are: favorable and predictable security context; efficient operation of Bulgarian institutions along with EU and NATO institutions to the end of collective security and its enhancement by the promotion of interoperability; maintenance of good neighbor relations and of regional security and stability; development of regional Black Sea cooperation; achievement of energy security by the diversificationof the energy sources, energy suppliers and transportation routes and other strategic resources; promotion of education, training, science and R&D along the lines of the national and shared European values; maintenance of economic, financial and social stability and prosperity; preventing and countering corruption and organized crime; preclusion of encroachments upon property and of offences against persons; enhancement of the environment and of the natural resources. Ill. Security context: risks and threats 1. Peace, security, development and prosperity are interdependent more than ever before. The security context is assuming special importance for developments within the society and the life of citizens. The interdependence of personal, national and international security is growing. 22. External and internal security is increasingly interdependent and the demarcation line is becoming provisional. International financial-economic and political developments impact strategically the internal security context as do the energy projects, Bulgaria's commitments to uphold modern democratic values, to defend and control the EU external borders and to combat transborder crime. 23. By their nature and forms the risks and threats become increasingly asymmetric and substantially impact the global and regional security context. 111.1. External security context 24. Globalization remains a leading trend that will continue to impact the overall external security context. Apart from globalization, other key change factors will be the possible shift of the economic growth focus from the West to the East, the growing impact of non-governmental structures, including corporate and religious entities, and developments in the energy sector, migration, poverty and development issues and climate change. 25. Bulgaria's membership in NATO and EU and the fact that none of the neighbor countries considers it a potential aggressor are the external security determining factors and will deter direct military threats to its sovereignty and territorial integrity in the long term. 26. Integration developments within the EU and trans-Atlantic cooperation are instrumental in the settlement on key international matters. The EU and NATO initiatives and actions make them increasing factors in strengthening international security. 27. Asymmetric threats, especially international terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), regional conflicts, cyber crime and transborder organized crime substantially impact the global and regional security context. 28. Terrorism is a serious threat to global security. Regional conflicts and economic and financial crises further exacerbate that threat. Terrorist organizations decentralize their structures, diversify their modi operandi and ably infiltrate into the democratic society, hence it is difficult to dismantle them. The possibility to use radioactive matter, toxic substances and bio-agents and to hack into databases and to access technologies to be put to terrorist ends is growing. 29. Risks of the WMD proliferation are growing as different states seek to get hold of them. The stockpiles of nuclear weapons and radioactive material in individual countries remain a risk. 30. Transborder organized crime is a major challenge to the security of citizens and the democratic foundation of society. It comprises economic crimes, the illicit production of and trafficking in drugs, the trafficking in human beings and their abuse, smuggling, the printing and circulation of counterfeit money and documents, cyber crime, money laundering, etc. Organized crime breeds corruption and thrives on corruption. 31. Cyber crime is a global and anonymous threat to information systems. Destructive impacts on information systems and networks may cause a crisis by impeding and/or paralyzing the normal functioning of systems or components that are critical to the economy, the financial system or the national government. 32. The failed states that are unable to guarantee the security, rights and freedoms of their citizens, to manage social relations and to meet their international commitments are a serious problem to international security. 33. Piracy and abduction of merchant fleet crews particularly in open sea around the coast of Africa and Southeast Asia are a new alarming phenomenon. The non-response to this phenomenon which is strange in the 21st century makes it a serious threat to world trade and transportation and to the security of sailing crews and passengers. 34. The unstable economic and political situation and the low standard of living in Third World states and regions generate a migration pressure on the country as an external EU border. 35. The risks to environmental security emanate from industrial accidents that cause hazardous emissions, transborder air, water and coastal pollution and from the threat of terrorism that will use substances that are extremely hazardous to the environment. The protection of corporate interests slows down the adoption ofreal measures to solve these problems in a broad international context. 36. The implementation of strategic international transport and energy projects enhances the security context level of certainty. This will not unilaterally improve the security context and calls for defense capabilities for the critical infrastructure. 37. The globalization of transport is conducive to the fast spread of infectious diseases and pandemics, exposes the states and the citizens, including their troops in international missions and in operations in locations where nature is hostile. 38. Energy security is an element of national security and a factor for economic stability. States become increasingly interdependent on vital resources - energy, water, raw materials and food, hence the higher risk of crisis emergence. Problems in that area become a most serious risk for all countries no matter how economically advanced they are and how much resource they possess. 39. The trend offurther stabilization and full integration into Euro-Atlantic and European space is dominating in Southeast Europe. The reduction of military capabilities of the states, the expansion of bilateral and regional cooperation, the growth of the regional market and the implementation of joint projects in different sectors are all conducive to that.The NATO and EU membership of states from this region and the gradual integration of the West Balkan states into European and Euro Atlantic structures underpin the growing tendencies of cooperation and good neighborliness. The accession of Bulgaria and Romania to NATO and EU projects a strong stabilizing effect for the whole region. 40. Positive tendencies prevail in the West Balkans owing to the international community's active commitment to solve usual and newly emerging problems. An important step towards enduring stability of the region was made by the accession of Albania and Croatia to NATO in 2009 and by keeping the door open to other states from the region in the next enlargement. However, some serious risks continue to face the democratic and sustainable development of states in the region. Attempts continue to revive typecast survivals that stem from the specific regional reality and that constitute a risk to security. 41. The Republic of Bulgaria views the Black Sea region in a broad European and Euro-Atlantic context in order to promote cooperation between countries in economy, trade and security. The region is assuming particularly great importance in the pipeline business that transports fuels from the countries where they are located to Europe's energy markets. The importance of the region is growing given Bulgaria's active role in the maintenance of international peace and its commitments to guard the NATO and EU external borders. 42. Middle East developments spell uncertain future for the region and an incipient lengthy transformation. The situation and the prospects in the region constitute a serious challenge to the EU and NATO countries. Changes are possible that might result in democratic government and balanced economic and social development. Alongside, there exist evident risks of stronger migration pressure, stronger influence of radical movements and mobilization of international terrorist networks in the vicinity of Europe. The ambition of some countries to pursue nuclear and/or missile programs leads to further risks that may complicate the situation. The elimination of the risks and the maintenance of the positive trends in the states in the region should be in the core of the new Euro-Atlantic strategy in whose development Bulgaria will take an active and constructive part while it recognizes its specific national interests. 43. NATO and EU have substantial responsibilities to the sustainable and enduring stability in Afghanistan; this mission demands the parallel solution of a set of diverse problems -the political and economic stability of the region, the fight against terrorism and radical Islam, the prevention of the production of and of the trafficking in drugs and of the trafficking in human beings. 111.2. Internal security context 44. The key positive internal security factors, include, inter alia, the enhancement of the role of democratic institutions and procedures, a functioning market economy and financial stability, socio-economic stability and progress, civil service reform and key institutions reform in the context of European integration. 45. All key documents of the United Nations Organization, the Council of Europe and the European Union vis-a-vis respect fo_r human rights and fundamental freedoms are an integral part of the national legislation. Relevant pieces of legislation have been passed and the implementing institutions have been set up. The country has adopted the legal arrangements and put up the institutions to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to self-determination, free self-organization for the development of communities that are formed on the basis of ethnic, age, religious, professional or other attribute. 46. An essential contribution is made by security and public order services that are engaged in early warning and other activities within the range of their competence in the interest of the national security. Cooperation is enhanced with the counterpart structures of NATO and EU, of member states and of other states. 47. The European Commission's Cooperation and Verification Mechanism in justice and home affairs is instrumental in addressing the deficiencies in the Judiciary reform and in countering corruption and organized crime. 48. Corruption in general and high level corruption in particular remains a major problem in modern Bulgarian society. Corruption spreads in consequence of the non-transparent way in which property changed hands, of the inadequate regulation of socio-economic relations, inefficient control and omissions in the administrationof justice.Corruption threatens the existence of and compliance with social, legal and moral rules, reinforces organized crime, undermines the credibility of authorities, weakens their functioning and discredits reforms. Corruption feeds on the deficiencies in central and local government which deliberately or incompetently increases the number of licenses and makes them increasingly complicated and on the absence of transparency and consistency in the public procurement process and in public funds spending. 49. Organized crime, transborder crime and particularly the trafficking in drugs are some major threats. Economic crimes related to the so-called grey economy have the strongest large-scale devastating impact as do the increasingly ingenious money laundering schemes that defraud the national budget and cause damage to welfare and public interest. These forms of crime undermine the principles of free competition, curtail consumer rights, discourage free enterprise and worsen the investment climate. SO. Common or conventional crime likewise continues to be a threat to citizens'daily life;higher risk zones emerge in some regions and communities where citizens don't feel safe and certain as far as their life and property is concerned. If such people happen to live in places with sizably declining population or being depopulated they feel even less safe. 51. Beside by crime, citizens' safety and interests are affected by bad governance, red tape, abuse of power, mismanagement of state- and municipality-owned assets and property. 52. The relatively high road accident statistics and the consequences of such accidents coined the phrase "road warfare"which every year takes a heavy toll of human lives. 53. The public health status has been worsening over the years. Sizeable groups of the Bulgarian society are undereducated and unqualified. These negative trends become more and more pronounced as certain communities from ethnic minorities are insufficiently integrated into the mainstream of society. The deep social stratification which is often seen as intolerably unjust holds disintegration potential. Assets whose origin in a number of cases is inexplicable undermine the integrity of the State which is to stand up as the pillar of law abidance and challenge the credibility of citizens who prosper on the basis of their earned income. 54. Drawing on the economic crisis and on the growing opportunities to travel, organized crime became very active in the illicit migration and in the trafficking in human beings, in particular in women and even girls, for sexual exploitation and for inclusion in criminal street gangs. The Bulgarian law-enforcement authorities' systematic and coordinated operations in collaboration with other states' homologues considerably downscaled these crimes and thus helped Bulgaria's accession to the EU. 55. Heavy dependence on energy resources creates economic and political vulnerabilities. The projects to diversify energy sources and transportation routes impact the geopolitical reality in the Balkans and in Europe and project directly into Bulgaria's national security. 56. The state of the transport, energy and communication infrastructure,the shortage of public finance and inefficient public finance management negatively impact the national security. 57. Social uncertainty and glaring social stratification hold sizable conflict potential. Illegally amassed wealth erodes the public perception of social justice. 58. Risks to environmental security emanate from soil, water and air pollution and from the depletion of natural resources in consequence of improper operations, weaker controls and accidents or disasters. 59. The never-ending reorganization of the security services and law-enforcement authorities with no strategic reform framework in place made them less efficient in defending security and in countering crime. 60. The fundamental legal framework of classified information is in place as are the relevant institutions and mechanisms and a lot of practical experience has been gained. Gaps have been detected in the prevention of unauthorized access to classified information. 111.3. The security context: general conclusions 61. The external security context that will impact the national security will have the following characteristics: interplay of multiple asymmetrical factors, high dynamism, indefiniteness, developments that are ambiguous and difficult to predict. 62. The security context trends indicate that new conflict and crisis situations might emerge in future in different parts of the world, so the risks and threats to Bulgaria's national security will have to be averted outside the country within the allied effort of NATO and EU. 63. There is not a state capable of dealing on its own with these risks and threats. This makes it imperative to find multilateral approaches to the solution of problems that are important for development and security and intensifies the interdependence of policies pursued nationally and internationally. 64. The United Nations, NATO, EU,OSCE and other international organizations have an important role in preventive diplomacy, crisis management, post-conflict stability, promotion of democracy, respect for human rights and for the rule of law.The influence of international financial, economic and trade organizations is expanding and positively impacts the security context. 65. While the influence of external factors grows, internal factors will remain crucial for the national security situation. IV. Security policy IV.1. In general 66. The security policy seeks to give citizens a stronger feeling of security as it creates the conditions and preconditions required to guarantee the national interests, to minimize the impact of risks and threats and to optimize the allocation of resources. 67. The national security policy is a set of interrelated priorities and sectoral policies that conform to the EU and NATO security policies. 68. Security priorities and policies are equally important for and in an equal measure effect the national security system. They are on a par and their role and position in specific situations and periods is determined by the security context dynamism and by the actions to take for the sake of national interests. IV.2. Priorities 69. The advancement of the principles of good governance and of countering corruption is crucial for the national security policy as a whole and from sector to sector. This will be achieved by means of: continual improvement of the legislation to minimize corruption practices and bad governance cases; increased efficiency, transparency and accountability of institutions in their functions; unambiguous allocation of duties and competences of the politically appointed and administrative tiers in institutions within the Executive branch of power; increased competence and efficiency of the Civil Service; training officials how to detect and counter attempted corruption; application of existing forms and development of new forms of control by NGOs and by individuals on the politically appointed and administrative tiers; promotion of interaction, partnership and civil society and NGO participation in the im plementation of anticorruption policies and measures by the Government. 70. A fair trial within a reasonable time builds public confidence in the government of the State and guarantees citizens' rights and the normal functioning of institutions and of economic entities. This will be achieved by means of: guaranteed transparency and efficiency in all phases of the administration of justice; improved professional skills of the police, the prosecution and the court and promotion of the forms of accountability to the public; establishment of a unified information environment to monitor and control the dispensation of justice; guaranteed independence of the Judiciary and protection of the Judiciary against attempted illicit solicitations; creation of efficient trial forms to deal with socially dangerous acts and crimes that are difficult to investigate. 71. The encouragement of lawful businesses and the assurance of the national budget revenue are substantially important for the resource backup of the national security policy. This will be achieved my means of: improvement of the legal and institutional environment to start up and do business; constriction of the grey economy, introduction of European standards and enhancement of the controlling authorities' role and efficient performance; strengthening the auditing authorities in awarding, fulfillment of and control on public procurement contracts, concessions and public-private partnerships; promotion of forms of good corporate management and of the culture of accountability by businesses and their representative organizations. IV.3. Sectoral security policies Financial and economic security policies 72. The stability of the financial system is ensured and early alert measures are mapped out to "whistle" about existing or possible risk developments affecting the monetary policy, financial stability and business turnover and to exercise permanent control on them. 73. Maintenance of macroeconomic stability, sustainability of the national economy and financial system in the face of international financial and economic crises. Maintenance of the approved Lev to Euro exchange rate until the country joins the Euro Zone. Promotion of financial market competition. 74. Financial institutions pursue an efficient fiscal policy in collaboration with other institutions of the State and in partnership with civil society organizations and private economic actors to ensure the national budget revenue side. 75. Financial control authorities gear their effort to activities and entities that substantially influence confidence in the banking system and in its stability, the citizens' savings deposits and the functioning of the national security system. 76. Protection of the EU financial interests by efficiently preventing and countering attempted fraud and mismanagement and misuse of EU funds. A common approach is developed to improve interaction with European partners. 77. Maintenance of efficient supervision and non-interruption of the operation of payment systems and of the financial infrastructure. Application of a set of measures to prevent money laundering and money counterfeiting and also to cut off the financing for extremist, terrorist and other outlawed activities. 78. The economic potential develops with the lever of a policy designed to boost labor productivity, make production less energy- and resource-intensive, address technology backwardness and innovatively replace production facilities. 79. Actions to generate an investment-friendly environment and to promote domestic l consumption, to increase exports such as value added goods and services. 80. The balanced economic development of regions in the Republic of Bulgaria is driven ' by programs that are financed by the national budget and by EU funds. t 81. The efficient management of market levers and the restriction of the grey economy's impacts are handled by the existing consultative and coordinating mechanism and by the exploration for new forms of cooperation with the unions of workers, employees and employers. Cooperation with the private sector helps devise mechanism to prevent fraud and money laundering and generate conditions that are conducive to socio-economic development in an efficient competitive environment. Social security policies 82. The Republic of Bulgaria views social security as a combination of efficacious healthcare, quality of life, meaningful employment, social security and social support. 83. Members of ethnic minority communities are an integral part of the Bulgarian nation. The national policy seeks to maintain the traditional relations of mutual respect between members of different ethnic origin and between their organizations. A focused policy is formulated to integrate emigrants into the Bulgarian mainstream society. 84. The Republic of Bulgaria puts forth an effort to address the demographic developments that unfavorably impact society by the creation of economic and social conditions and by a well educated knowledge-based society which is capable of capitalizing, to the maximum extent, on its intellectual and creative resources. 85. Modernization of primary and secondary education in public and in private schools alike by the strict application of national standards is a way to achieve high quality social security. The development of tertiary education and R&D and science and the conservation of cultural and historic heritage pave the way to strategic actions in planning and implementing sectoral and general national policies for the individual's and society's development. 86. The Bulgarian nation takes shape and evolves on the basis of the principle of unitary citizenship and also on the basis of the principle of solidarity which is applied strictly to the social safety nets. The Government guarantees a minimum income and living standard to the most vulnerable groups. The Government exercises continual and systematic control to protect citizens' interests and to prevent sizable financial fraud and to timely detect the fraudsters who act to the detriment of the financial interests of citizens and of their organizations. In parallel, encouragement is provided to private initiative to guarantee income by means of additional coverage schemes. 87. Special attention is devoted to controls on infectious diseases, to the prevention of the entry and spread of infections into and around the country, to the containment of epidemic outbreaks and of epidemics, to the use of bio-agents for terrorist purposes, to high immunization coverage and to the organization of fast response to the emergence of situations that constitute a threat to public health. Special actions are taken to prevent common diseases among vulnerable and excluded social groups. 88. It is the understanding of social policy that misdeeds in one area lead to failures and negative developments in another area or in all other areas. Hence the need to take measures, by consultative and interrelated administrative actions, to avoid or else halt negative developments as soon as they emerge. 89. Promotion of employment and improvement of skills are supported by various policies that ensure earned income and opportunities for self-fulfillment. Energy security policy 90. National security is essentially contingent on energy stability as an ongoing process of delivery of social services that are vital for the functioning of society as a whole in the face of likely terrorist threats, natural disasters and large-scale industrial accidents. The enhancement of energy security as a national security element is a long-term process that calls for investment and sustainable state policy. 91. It is in the interest of the Republic of Bulgaria that a EU common energy policy is formulated. Bulgaria supports the EU strateg_ic initiatives designed to install the required infrastructure and to diversify energy supplies. The initiatives are implemented by the agency of the existing system of financing and by the introduction of new more efficient financial instruments of which South East European countries may avail primarily given their great dependence on a single energy source and their inferior energy infrastructure. J 92. Interconnection with the neighbor countries' systems is a priority in guaranteeing Bulgaria's energy security as is the increase of the natural gas storage facilities volume. V 93. The Republic of Bulgaria supports international energy projects within the framework of South Corridor among which NABUCCO, a EU priority, ranks first. Similarly, Bulgaria supports the South Stream international energy project. Their implementation is bound with a civil, public, environmental and national security assessment. 94. Nuclear power development is strategically important for Bulgaria's national security. The installation of new units is institutionally supported as these will generate electricity free of emissions and owing to the amassed successful expertise and professional competence. Nuclear power development is strictly compliant with the nuclear waste management requirements, shutdown rules and safety measures. 95. Promotion of energy efficiency and of energy saving is an energy security policy priority. Bulgaria holds a vast energy-saving potential in the generation, transmission and consumption. The usage of this potential contributes to faster economic growth while the dependence on energy imports is not growing. The Republic of Bulgaria has set itself the objective to considerably downscale the GDP energy intensity by the promotion of policies that are designed to financially support energy efficiency, to boost a market of energy efficient products and services and to apply regulatory measures and other levers. 96. The national energy security and the enhancement of the environment rely on the implementation of Bulgaria's policies that are designed to increase the proportion of electricity from renewable or alternative energy sources in the energy mix and to substitute electricity with natural gas. 97. Bulgaria supports technology advances in production methods efficiency, in the em ployment of clean coal technologies, and in the application of state of the art technologies that are compliant with European standards and affordable to the national economy potential. 98. Bulgaria's energy policy rests on a balanced approach to the mix of renewable energy sources, nuclear power, natural gas, coal-fired generation and hydropower to guarantee energy security and economic efficiency. 99. The Republic of Bulgaria pursues a clear and consistent regulatory policy to guarantee the interests of national security, of the society and of citizens in the operation and development of power generation plants and in the transmission and distribution infrastructures. 100. The implementation of major energy projects calls for national security impact assessment, environmental impact assessment, assessment of compliance with the subject and objectives of protected (listed) areas, and assessment of guaranteed security for the citizens, the society and the State. 101. Energy security resource management acquires primary significance. Resource management is part of the strategy of crisis prevention and a condition for the reliant operation of key and critical energy, transport, communication and information infrastructure. 102. The Republic of Bulgaria meets commitments deriving from the Directive concerning the protection of European and national critical infrastructure and including, as a must, opportunities for public-private partnerships on the basis of mutual interest and partner expertise in order to guarantee the protection of public interests and needs by efficient allocation of funds, spread of the risks and attribution of benefits in the process. Security policy in man-nature relationships 103. Policy security is manifest in meeting the environmental assessment and protection standards and in joining global and regional initiatives and environment projects that are to enhance the environment and to protect environmental security. 104. An essential aspect of environmental security protection is the prevention, control and handling of the consequences of industrial accidents that discharge hazardous emissions, cause transborder air, water and coastal area pollution, and in the face of terrorist threats to use weapons of mass destruction. 1 OS. The national water resources management is based on an integrated information system and performed by an interagency mechanism of planning, monitoring and assessment. 106. Efforts are also geared to devise an operating system to control and cope with natural disasters consequences given active public involvement on the part of citizens and civil society organizations. Justice and home affairs policy 107. The Republic ofBulgaria is fully and intensively integrated into the EU principles, objectives, policies, rules and practices in the field of justice. The entry into force of the Treaty Concerning the Accession of the Republic of Bulgaria to the European Union made the country part of the European legal area and made it binding on the country to apply a new set of rules, the acquis communautaires, which differs essentially from international law and from the member states' national legislations. That process has an essential impact on the Bulgarian national lawmaking and law-enforcement process. 108. Countering organized crime and corruption and reform of the Judiciary to make it effective, accountable and transparent are strategic goals. 109. The Judiciary bodies' specialization is a response to the dynamic evolution of the forms of terrorism, organized crime and corruption. 11O. In parallel, legislation must be sophisticated in the area of the protection of prisoners'rights, incrimination of torture, abuse of force, auxiliary devices and arms in line with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights. 111. Bulgaria's security and public order services interact with each other and cooperate with private corporate entities, citizens and civil society organizations. Internationally these services maintain sustainable cooperation with the structures of international organizations and of states with which relations of alliance or partnership have been established. 112. To counter global and terrorist threat the security and public order services gear their main effort to action, on their own or in collaboration with ally or partner services, to prevent and thwart attempts to install cells of international terrorist and extremist organizations on Bulgarian territory and to foil their activities. 113. The cooperation with the NATO and EU countries' partner services is developed in countering the proliferation of and the illicit trade in arms, in particular small arms and light weapons, so as to strictly observe restriction regulations, to avoid risky transactions and to make illicit routes bypass our territory. . ,.. 114. The development of community policing as a strategic line of domestic public order policy calls for changes in the individual policeman's conduct and attitude to the citizen. 115. Efficient police-civil society partnership is realized in conditions of transparency and respect for citizens' rights and dignity. Mutual confidence is built between policemen and citizens in the course of their daily contacts. 116. The Republic of Bulgaria pursues a policy of active prevention of the key factors that generate crime and threaten public safety. The defeat of common crime calls for counteraction on a daily basis without any tolerance for criminals. 117. An interinstitutional approach is advanced to achieve the objectives of countering common, organized and transborder crime; the approach is to provide the legislation and to consolidate the system of management, to strengthen administrative and operating capacity, to put the information resource under integrated management, to achieve a higher degree of interoperability that leads to integrated action with international organizations and EU institutions and with states with which relations of partnership are maintained. 118. The fight against the trafficking in and the distribution and production of narcotics and precursors is supported by the increased efficiency of the law enforcement and controlling agencies and by their enhanced cooperation with citizens and civil society organizations. 119. State institutions and local authorities in collaboration with private economic entities, citizens and civil society organizations generate conditions to steadily minimize road accidents and their repercussions by a set of traffic safety integrated measures. 120. Bulgaria's accession to the Schengen Area guarantees the EU external borders security. Bulgaria develops and maintains efficient information systems on security and public order in line with the Schengen Agreement requirements. Competent authorities interact with the FRONTEX (the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union) and with the homologue agencies of neighbor and other European states. 121. Efficient response to crises and protection of citizens, their property and the critical infrastructure in the event of fires, disasters and accidents and against deliberate attacks takes an integrated approach to the establishment of an integrated, flexible and sustainable national management system. A capacity is built for the purposes of prevention, early warning and crisis management on the basis of information and of the prospect to exchange data with the help of, inter alia, space and other high technologies. Integrated military and civilian crisis management capabilities for action domestically and within the EU are developed. 122. Countering corruption succeeds on the basis of integrated measures that are designed to develop the interinstitutional approach; to strengthen the management system; to put legislation in place; to build administrative capacity; to have the information resource under integrated management; to achieve interaction, international cooperation and operating command. The higher efficiency of local authorities is achieved on the basis of the involvement of citizens in local self-government. Institutions and NGOs base their work to inculcate active and steady civic attitudes to lessen the tolerance of corruption as they launch education policies and public awareness campaigns. 123. In cooperation with citizens and civil society organizations the State plans, maps out and takes measures to halt hate speech and to suppress outbreaks of xenophobia and ethnic and religious intolerance and other prejudice. 124. Bulgaria's policy is geared to improve the protection of classified information and of per sonal data while access to public information is ensured. Legislation, institutions and mechanisms of the protection and use of information develop in collaboration with citizens and civil society organizations. International law provides for and strengthens cooperation with EU and NATO structures and with member countries and other states. 125. Institutional and civil potential to counter cyber crime develops accordingly. Cooperation is maintained with private business in information and communication high technologies. Cooperation with EU and NATO in computer security incident response is part of the security policy. External security policy 126. Bulgaria's foreign policy is geared to guarantee the security of the State and of its citi zens in line with the national interests and international commitments and also to contribute to peace and stability in the world, to promote good neighbor relations and to build confidence among states and nations. The Republic of Bulgaria abides by the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and supports the efforts geared to reform the UN so as to strengthen its capacity to achieve its purposes. 127. The Republic of Bulgaria aspires to enhance and promote the NATO's role in the ful fillment of political and operating obligations. Bulgaria wishes deeper political dialog within NATO,the country's successful participation in NATO operations andmissionsandthetransformation of the alliance, on the basis of, inter alia, participation in multinational projects and installation of joint antimissile defense. Bulgaria actively supports the NATO's "open-door policy" on the basis of the conviction that the European and Euro-Atlantic perspective is the most efficient tool to strengthen stability and security. 128. The Republic of Bulgaria continues to actively participate in the EU member states' collective effort geared to an agreed and efficient policy implementation and to the application of instruments in the field of international relations. It is particularly important that the Common Security and Defense Policy (CSDP) develop and contribute to the consolidation of trans-Atlantic cooperation. Bulgaria develops a national capability to participate in the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), including crisis management operations and missions. The Republic of Bulgaria will step up its contribution and intensify its commitment to EU Enlargement. Within the framework of the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP) Bulgaria will try to take a balanced approach to EU neighbors to the East and South as such an approach will make the EU a stronger global security factor. 129. A strategic goal is to strengthen the Euro-Atlantic community's unity and to enhance its leading role in European and global security. Bulgaria's trans-Atlantic relations develop in a harmonious and balanced manner to enable the country's foreign policy and security priorities. 130. Primary importance is attached to the multi-pronged approach to the assurance of peace and security in Europe and in the world and to avert the risks and threats that face them. Bulgaria's foreign policy firmly abides by the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and supports the efforts geared to reform the UN so as to strengthen its capacity to achieve its purposes. 131. The Republic of Bulgaria takes an active part in the establishment and maintenance of EU and NATO relations with the Russian Federation while it sticks to theyiew that an overall approach should be applied to relations that concern security and cooperation with recognition of the purposes, principles and values as laid down in the UN Charter, the North Atlantic Treaty, the Treaty on European Union, the Statute of the Council of Europe and the OSCE underlying documents. 132. Mutually advantageous cooperation with states that are leaders in various sectors will be of particular importance for Bulgaria's techno-economic and technological development. 133. The Republic of Bulgaria actively supports the West Balkan states' European and Euro Atlantic integration subject to the criteria to be met. Our foreign policy is to avert the risk of interethnic conflicts emergence. Bulgaria encourages efforts geared to strengthen the institutions of democracy, market economy, the guarantee and protection of human rights, including the rights of citizens who are minority communityrnembers.Special attention is devoted to the establishment of stable and lasting good neighbor relations and to their redefinition on the basis of modern European principles and values. 134. In the Black Sea Region the Republic of Bulgaria strives to enhance its active role, bilaterally and multilaterally, in the promotion of regional peace and security, energy security included, and in the implementation of economic programs and infrastructure projects of regional and all European importance in the context of EU and NATO activities that are singled out as priorities. 135. The Republic of Bulgaria supports the international community in its effort to achieve lasting peace in the Middle East and to avert threats that emanate from terrorism, extremism and WMD proliferation. Bulgaria supports the US leading role in the Middle East peace process and makes its own contribution to the enhancement of the EU's role in the region. Our country maintains traditional contacts and establishes new contacts in economy, politics and human relationships. 136. The Republic of Bulgaria continues to directly participate in the international community's effort in Afghanistan to avert transnational threats such as terrorism, trafficking in drugs, organized crime and illicit migration all of which are an offshoot of negative developments in that country. Bulgaria participates in the all-out efforts geared to achieve enduring security, stability and economic recovery for Afghanistan. 137. The Republic of Bulgaria participates in the cooperation between the EU member states in the non-proliferation of WMD, disarmament and arms control. Bulgaria pursues an export control policy in compliance with the political commitments under multilateral agreements and in recognition of international UN-, EU- and OSCE-imposed sanctions. 138. The Republic of Bulgaria supports the organizations of foreign citizens of Bulgarian extraction in their effort to save their cultural identity. A new foreign policy focus is the active protection and delivery of consular and other services to the fast growing Bulgarian communities in an increasing number of countries. 139. To achieve its strategic foreign policy and security objectives, the Republic of Bulgaria will continue to build up a competent, loyal and efficient professional diplomatic service that has the needed material, human, technological and financial resource to fulfill its growing obligations and tasks in a bilateral and multilateral context. Defense policy 140. A strategic defense policy objective is to defend and uphold the national interests by the development, sophistication and deployment of adequate defense capabilities and by the completion of the manning of interoperable armed forces that are capable to fulfill all tasks that proceed from the trends in geostrategic security context developments. 141. The defense policy formulation and implementation is based on: shared responsibility for se0urity, adequate participation in and employment of NATO collective defense mechanisms and of the EU Common Security and Defense Policy; the security context parameters, the risks and threats and the armed forces deployment scenarios thereof; the defense capabilities status and development plans; the resources available; the options for participation in multinational projects with the active involvement of Bulgarian industries and research centers. 142. The achievement of the defense policy strategic objective hinges on the country's NATO and EU membership. The efficiency of our membership in these organizations is crucial for making a maximum use of the opportunities that it affords. 143. Our country's contribution to the international community's effort to support peace and stability includes participation in alliance and coalition operations with troops, security services, public order services and civilian capabilities. 144. Bulgaria's armed forces ensure the national military security, participate in the NATO collective defense and in the EU Common Security and Defense Policy. They are the stalwart of the country's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. 145. The armed forces and the institutions that ensure defense capabilities gear their effort to: the national defense; the development, maintenance and delivery of military and other capabilities that are needed for the NATO collective security and for the EU Common Security and Defense Policy; the participation in missions and operations to consolidate international order and security; the development of a new system for the recruitment, drill and deployment of volunteer reservists to complete the manning of the armed forces; the maintenance and delivery of capabilities and the organization of peacetime regional reservist units to be commanded by regional governors and mayors whenever support is needed for the population or defense is needed for national critical infrastructure in the effort to avoid disasters and accidents and to cope with their aftereffects; the development of a system of volunteer drill for Bulgarian citizens to defend the Homeland. 146. The national defense strategy sets out the objectives, functions, tasks, recruitment, development and deployment of the armed forces and defense capabilities. The defense capabilities development is subject to an analysis and assessment in regular reviews on defense or armed forces structures and to armed forces development plans and is annually treated in a report on defense and armed forces. 147. A defense policy priority is the development of a modern defense institution based on an integrated efficiently operating defense command system subject to control by the civil society and Parliament. This undertaking calls for: modern defense management based on the efficient spending of funds that bind long-term planning with the achievement of preset results in tune with the principles of accountability and transparency; planning based on capabilities and possible deployment scenarios; rearmament and re-equipment of the defense system and the armed forces drawing National Security Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria 45 on the experience amassed in missions and operations and on the results of defense-oriented research work; drilling and training defense personnel up to the modern Alliance standards; our broader participation in structures, programs and projects jointly with our allies and partners within the framework of the NATO ag ncies, the European Defense Agency (EDA) and the EU's Security Research and Innovation Agenda; creation of maximal opportunities to engage the national defense technologies and industries and research/innovation capabilities; update of concepts and doctrines on how to develop and utilize the military and civilian defense system components. V. National security system V.1. Mainlines of action of the national security system 148. The system is to maintain the national security in an optimum condition, to enhance the manageability of State institutions with the active involvement of citizens and civil society organizations and to function efficiently to implement the Strategy. Individual citizen's safety is the main criterion of the system's efficiency. 149. The Strategy objectives can be achieved providing there exists a codified and institutionally organized process of dialog, consultation and interaction between the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary, the President of the Republic, the citizens and civil society organizations. 150. Laws and bylaws concerning national security are tailored to the social relations evolution and to the principles and guidelines as spelled out in the Strategy. Legislation is put in place to create a level playing field across the National Security Area and to preclude legal incongruities and contradictions between institutional and functional structures and mechanisms. 151. Citizens and civil society organizations are both national security consumers and active participants in the system's functioning inasmuch as they can. The State makes sure than the system is transparent to the pubic, to the extent that it is not exposed, and contributes to the development of civil society's capacity to act in the interest of national security. 152. The formulation of the State's national security policy is a responsibility of the National Assembly, the Council of Ministers and the President of the Republic. 153. Vis-a-vis the national security, the National Assembly passes laws, approves the National Security Strategy, doctrines and other documents within the range of its competence to set the national security policy parameters. The National Assembly gives an appraisal of the state of the national security policy and of State institutions' discharge of obligations, makes recommendations to the central government and local authorities and to citizens and civil society organizations. 154. The President's prerogatives in the national security policy are defined in the Constitution and in the national legislation. The President is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces and presides over the Consultative National Security Council. 155. The Consultative National Se urity Council presided by the President of the Republic constitutes the national security system's political consultative tier. The Council's role is to help reach broad public consensus on national security matters. 156. The national security policy is implemented by the central government and the regional governments. The locaI authorities and the Judiciary contribute, to the extent of their competences, to the security policy implementation. The efficiency of the performance hinges on the mutual trust and cooperation between the State institutions, the private sector, NGOs and citizens and also between all those and partner states in the exchange of information and in concerted action. 157. The Council of Ministers (the Government) is bound to submit an annual national security report to the National Assembly before the end of March. 158. The interim national security priorities and the related resources are defined by the Council of Ministers in consultation with the President of the Republic and with the relevant standing parliamentary committees. 159. The cabinet ministers, chiefs of departments and regional governors bear responsibility for the national security within their specific remit. To exercise that responsibility they establish the needed functional and structural organization. 160. Institutional capacity is built upon the principles of continuing functional interaction and operating independence. Parallel duplication of structures is precluded as is the excessive concentration of powers, competences and resources within one single institution. Separation of competences and high degree of coordination are the guiding principle. The principles of a minimum number of management decision-taking units and of optimal structures and positions are observed in setting the top-level/administration/implementation ratio. 161. The tools to enable the national security system management and functioning comprise: analysis and assessment of the security context condition and tendencies and adoption of precautionary measures; timely and adequate exchange of information; performance planning, preparation and management; application of a broad and systemic interinstitutional approach; coordination of the work of competent institutions and organizations; methods and techniques of input-output assessment of the security system and its components; evaluation mechanisms for actions taken and results achieved in order to improve their efficiency and efficacy; installation of an internal control and readjustment system for the national security system. 162. The Council of Ministers consultative and coordinating bodies that operate in security and public order and in preventing and countering corruption and that work to develop the national defense industrial complex are an essential element of the national security system. These bodies coordinate the running implementation of the State policy anq advise the Government and the relevant institutions of the State in the decision-making and decision-taking process within the range of their competence. 163. As a consultative and coordinating body under the umbrella of the Council of Ministers the Security Council proposes the decisions on the definition of the national security system implementing agencies' strategic tasks and on crisis management; puts together the resource planning so as to achieve a syr'1ergetic effect in the utilization of resources and coordinates the execution of the decisions taken. The Council provides the logistics and monitors the Strategy application. The composition and functions of the Security Council and of its units are determined by the Council of Ministers. 164. The activities of the Council of Ministers Security Council and of its Secretariat and of the regional security councils are supported by the central government and the regional governments' bodies and structures and by recruited experts. Financing is provided under a separate spending item on the Council of Ministers budget. 165. The security services and, if need be, public order services, regardless of their umbrella authority, act to defend the national security on their own and/or in synergy within the framework of the intelligence community. The intelligence community comprises State bodies that provide information and make analyses to assess the risks and threats to national security, to trace their roots and to plan and take countermeasures. 166. The security services are engaged in intelligence and counterintelligence operations: to detect, avert and counteract covert attacks against the national interests and against actions that threaten or undermine the political, economic, military and defense capabilities; to defend the national security and counter international terrorism and extremism, organized crime and drug trafficking, the illicit distribution of products and technologies that are subject to international control and of weapons of mass destruction, money laundering and other risks and threats to the interests of the Republic of Bulgaria and of its allies and partners; to uphold and promote the national historic and cultural values and heritage; to acquire information needed to take strategic decisions on sustaining or increasing the prosperity of the citizens, the society and the State and on individual, societal and statehood development; to defend the functions and safety of Bulgarian troops that are deployed for operations and missions outside Bulgaria. 167. Training and saving human resource is of particular importance for the national security system to function. The State builds a well-resourced codified subsystem of programs, institutions and flexible organizational forms of training and retraining of the State institutions' staff and of the citizens and citizens' organizations. 168. State institutions apply flexible forms to use the expertise and experience of Bulgarian citizens who have professionally served in the national security sector. 169. General and specialist training is provided for information support to the national security policy, crisis-specific actions and other actions that have a bearing on the advancement of the national interests. 170. State institutions, universities and other educational structures and civil society organizations work to gain experience and knowledge and to formulate innovative decisions drawing on foreign and international theory and practice. V.2. Control and accountability of bodies with immediat,: duties to the national security system 171. Democratic control on the security system is exercised by the National Assembly and by civil society organizations.The Executive branch of power bodies report to Parliament and provide information to civil society as bound by the law. 172. The National Assembly exercises parliamentary control on the national security system's activity. National Security Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria 48 173. The Security Council and its member institutions provide information identical in substance and in the same amount, to the President of the Republic and to the Speaker of the National Assembly. 174. The Prime Minister, the cabinet ministers, chiefs of agencies, regional governors and local authorities must devise mechanisms to timely inform the general public about what they do with respect to the national security policy implementation. VI. Conclusion 175. The National Security Strategy of the Republic of Bulgaria reflects the interests of the citizens, the society and the State in the context of the understanding of the national security nature in a specific security context and given the interplay of existing factors. The Council of Ministers proposes that the Strategy be timely updated to reflect the changes in the national development priorities, in the security context and in the availability of resources.